Unless otherwise specified, Chinese texts in this article are written in (Simplified Chinese/Traditional Chinese; Pinyin) format.
In cases where Simplified and Traditional Chinese scripts are identical, the Chinese term is written once.
Chinese is spoken by the Han majority and many other ethnic groups in China.
Nearly 1.2 billion people (around 16% of the world's population) speak some form of Chinese as their first language.
The internal diversity of Chinese has been likened to that of the Romance languages, but may be even more varied.
All varieties of Chinese are tonal and analytic.
Standard Chinese (Putonghua/Guoyu/Huayu) is a standardized form of spoken Chinese based on the Beijing dialect of Mandarin.
It is the official language of China and Taiwan, as well as one of four official languages of Singapore.
It is one of the six official languages of the United Nations.
The language has evolved over time, with various local varieties becoming mutually unintelligible.
In reaction, central governments have repeatedly sought to promulgate a unified standard.
Without a secure reconstruction of proto-Sino-Tibetan, the higher-level structure of the family remains unclear.
A top-level branching into Chinese and Tibeto-Burman languages is often assumed, but has not been convincingly demonstrated.
The earliest examples of Chinese are divinatory inscriptions on oracle bones from around 1250 BCE in the late Shang dynasty.
These works define phonological categories, but with little hint of what sounds they represent.
Most linguists now believe it represents a diasystem encompassing 6th-century northern and southern standards for reading the classics.
The Zhongyuan Yinyun (1324) was a dictionary that codified the rhyming conventions of new sanqu verse form in this language.
In the 1930s a standard national language Guóyǔ (国语/國語 "national language") was adopted.
The People's Republic founded in 1949 retained this standard, calling it pǔtōnghuà (普通话/普通話 "common speech").
The national language is now used in education, the media, and formal situations in both Mainland China and Taiwan.
The Chinese language has spread to neighbouring countries through a variety of means.
The Four Commanderies were established in northern Korea in the first century BCE, but disintegrated in the following centuries.
Scholars from different lands could communicate, albeit only in writing, using Literary Chinese.
These coinages, written in shared Chinese characters, have then been borrowed freely between languages.
The proportion of vocabulary of Chinese origin thus tends to be greater in technical, abstract, or formal language.
However, these were limited to popular literature until the late 19th century.
Vietnamese is written with a Latin-based alphabet.
Examples of loan words in English include "tea", from Hokkien (Min Nan) tê (茶) and "kumquat", from Cantonese gam1gwat1 (金橘).
Jerry Norman estimated that there are hundreds of mutually unintelligible varieties of Chinese.
Generally, mountainous South China exhibits more linguistic diversity than the North China Plain.
In parts of South China, a major city's dialect may only be marginally intelligible to close neighbors.
In parts of Fujian the speech of neighboring counties or even villages may be mutually unintelligible.
Jin, previously included in Mandarin.
Huizhou, previously included in Wu.
Pinghua, previously included in Yue.
It is based on the Beijing dialect, which is the dialect of Mandarin as spoken in Beijing.
Therefore, it is used in government agencies, in the media, and as a language of instruction in schools.
A native of Guangzhou may speak both Cantonese and putonghua.
In addition to Mandarin, most Taiwanese also speak Minnan, Hakka or an Austronesian language.
Because varieties from different groups are not mutually intelligible, some scholars prefer to describe Wu and so on as languages.
As Campbell (2008) explains, linguists often ignore mutual intelligibility when varieties share intelligibility with a central variety (i.e.
Other options include vernacular, lect  regionalect, topolect, and variety.
Modern-day Chinese speakers of all kinds communicate using the modern standard written language, the written form of Standard Chinese.
Additionally, in Taiwan it is closely associated with Taiwanese independence, some of whose supporters promote the local Taiwanese Hokkien variety.
The relationship between the Chinese spoken and written language is rather complex.
Its spoken varieties evolved at different rates, while written Chinese itself has changed much less.
Chinese characters are morphemes independent of phonetic change.
Written colloquial Cantonese has become quite popular in online chat rooms and instant messaging amongst Hong-Kongers and Cantonese-speakers elsewhere.
Use of it is considered highly informal, and does not extend to many formal occasions.
In Hunan, women in certain areas write their local language in Nü Shu, a syllabary derived from Chinese characters.
